NATOPS FLIGHT MANUAL - NAVY MODEL F-45A
A1-F45A-NFM-001


NATOPS FLIGHT MANUAL
NAVY MODEL F-45A 891838
AND UP AIRCRAFT
  

A1-F45A-NFM-001


THIS PUBLICATION A1-F45A-NFM-001 IS DATED 3 NOVEMBER 2032
  

 DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT C: Distribution Authorized to US government agencies and their contractors to protect publications required for official use or administrative purposes only, determined on November 3, 2032. Other requests for this document shall be referred to Commanding Officer, Naval Air Technical Data and Engineering Service Command, Naval Air Station North Island, P.O. Box 357031, Building 90 Distribution, San Diego, California 92135-7031
ISSUED BY AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS AND UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE COMMANDER NAVAL AIR SYSTEMS COMMAND
COMNAVAIRFOR A1-F45A-NFM-001
N45
3 November 32


COMNAVAIRFOR MANUAL A1-F45A-NFM-001
From: Commander, Naval Air Forces
Subj: NAVAL AIR TRAINING AND OPERATING PROCEDURES STANDARDIZATION (NATOPS) F45A GENERAL FLIGHT AND OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS
1. Purpose. To issue policy and procedural guidance applicable to a broad spectrum of users and complement individual NATOPS manuals. This is a complete revision and should be reviewed in its entirety.
2. Background. The NATOPS program is a positive approach toward
improving combat readiness and achieving a substantial reduction in the aircraft mishap rate. Standardization, based on professional knowledge and experience, provides the basis for development of sound operating procedures. The standardization program is not intended to stifle individual initiative, but rather to aid commanding officers in increasing their unit's combat potential without reducing command prestige or responsibility. With the objective of maintaining agile standardization guidance, Commander, Naval Air Forces accepted responsibility for NATOPS program management previously contained in OPNAVINST 3710.9.
3. Reproduction. Duplication of this publication for other than
military use, without specific authority of Commander, Naval Air
Forces, is not authorized.
4. Records Management. Records created as a result of this
instruction, regardless of media or format, shall be managed per
the Secretary of the Navy (SECNAV) Manual 5210.1.
5. Reports and Forms. Reports and forms required by this
instruction are listed in appendix L.




TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 - Overview & Standard Procedures
1.1 - Overview - Page 4
1.2 - Aircraft Overview - Page 5
1.3 - Cockpit Instruments - Page 6
1.4 - Startup Procedure - Page 9
1.5 - Takeoff & Landing Procedure (Runway) - Page 10
1.6 - Takeoff & Landing Procedure (CATOBAR) - Page 11
1.7 - Takeoff & Landing Procedure (V/STOVL) - Page 14
1.8 - Vertical Control Autopilot (VCAP) - Page
2 - Systems Employment
2.1 - BDynamics Advanced Touchscreen Multi-Function Display (ATMFCD) - Page 
2.2 - Garmin 54MNAV Navigation Display & Garmin 54GPS-T Waypoint Tracking System - Page
2.3 - Tactical Situation Display (TSD) - Page
2.4 - Raytheon GEN IV(F) HMDS - Page
2.5 - Lockheed Martin GEN III EOTS Targeting System - Page
2.6 - AN/APG-91 Radar - Page
2.7 - AN/ALR-96 Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) - Page
3 - Weapons Employment
3.0 - General Preface
3.1 - GBU-12 Laser-Guided Bomb - Page
3.2 - GBU-38/-39 GPS-Guided Bombs - Page
3.3 - Mk.82/83 Unguided Bombs - Page
3.4 - AGM-145/GBU-53 Optically-Guided Munitions - Page
3.5 - AGM-161 Joint Anti-Surface Standoff Missile (JASSM) - Page
3.6 - AIM-120D Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile (AMRAAM) - Page
3.7 - AIM-9X Block III IR-Guided Air-to-Air Missile - Page
3.8 - GAU-22 25mm Rotary Cannon - Page
4 - Advanced Procedures
4.1 - Emergency Procedures - Page
4.2 - Missile Evasion: Radar-Guided - Page
4.3 - Missile Evasion: IR-Guided - Page
4.4 - Radar Low-Observability (Stealth) - Page
5 - Index
5.1 - Callouts - Page
5.2 - Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Terminology - Page




1.1 - OVERVIEW


In this manual, you will find instructions to help pilot the F-45A Ghost in a modern combat theater. Begin by reading the aircraft overview, and read Cockpit Instruments to gain a situational understanding of the cockpit’s layout. It is mandatory to memorize the Ghost’s procedures.




1.2 - AIRCRAFT OVERVIEW


The F-45A Ghost is a CATOBAR capable, V/STOVL, stealth, multirole aircraft. The F-45 was created in 2032 by Lockheed Martin (Boeing), under project JSF II. The project arose amongst fears of the F-35 JSF being outclassed by other, more modern fighters, such as ASF-58. Having learned from the failures of JSF, the JSF II focused not only on technology implementation, but also cost effectiveness. Thus, the F-45 has become a much more affordable airframe for foeign nations. Much of F-35’s tech has been improved upon, such as TSD, HMDS, and EOTS, in addition to new weapons systems, such as Ballista. The next-generation TSD and HMDS provide the F-45 with unparalleled battlefield situational awareness, greatly aiding pilots. F-45 also makes use of several lessons learned from F/A-26, such as the PIMP project. The stealth capabilities of F-45 allow it to get much closer to enemy radar without detection, and avoid detection from IRIS and other EO-like sensors. F-45 contains four internal weapons bays, two inboard and two outboard, giving adequate weapons capacity while maintaining stealth. If stealth is not a concern, six external pylons may be added, four on the wing and two on the wingtip. Internal fuel capacity is 15,840 pounds, and may be increased with the use of external fuel tanks.
1.3 - COCKPIT INSTRUMENTS
RIGHT CONSOLE:
  

Bottom: Comms panel
Middle: Canopy switch
Middle Right: APU Switch & RPM indicator
Middle Left: Battery switch & indicator light
Top: Engine ignition switch (covered) & RPM indicator


CENTER CONSOLE:  
Top: ATMFCD
Middle Left: HMDS power & brightness knobs
Middle Right: ATMFCD power & brightness knobs
Bottom Right: Standby ADI
Bottom Middle: Master arm switch (covered) & indicator light
Bottom Left: Seat height adjustment buttons
Mottom Farthest Left: HMDS Visor & NVG buttons




LEFT SIDE CONSOLE:
  

Top: VCAP button
Middle Right: Landing gear lever & indicator lights
Middle Left: Jettison selector knob
Bottom Right: Wing fold switch & indicator light
Bottom Left: Parking brake switch & indicator light


LEFT BOTTOM CONSOLE:
  

Top: Fuel port switch
Top Right: Tailhook switch
Middle Left: External lights panel
Middle Right: Launch bar switch
Bottom: Instrument lights switch & brightness knob
Furthest Bottom: Music player












1.4 - STARTUP PROCEDURE


1. Start BATTERY
2. Close CANOPY
3. Set Lights AS REQUIRED
4. Start APU and confirm RPM NOMINAL
5. Start ENGINE and confirm RPM NOMINAL
6. Start HMDS and ATMFCD
7. Set ATMFCD AS REQUIRED
8. Shut down APU
9. Check Microphone ON
10. Check Wings DOWN
11. Check Master Arm OFF


Note - Nominal refers to the RPM being in the green zone of the dial. Starting engine before the APU is fully spun up will lead to ignition failure.
In the event of ignition failure, shut down engine, and confirm APU RPM NOMINAL. Once NOMINAL, repeat step 5.


________________
1.5 - TAKEOFF AND LANDING (RUNWAY)


TAKEOFF:
1. Hold BRAKES
2. Advance throttle to AFTERBURNER
3. Wait 5 seconds
4. Release BRAKES
5. At 175KTAS, rotate to 10 degrees
6. Once positive rate of climb is established, set landing gear UP


LANDING:
1. Contact Tower For Permission to Land
2. Line Up with Runway (Note: Runway Number Indicates its Heading in Tens of Degrees)
3. Under 250KTAS, set landing gear DOWN
4. Slow to +9 degrees of onspeed AoA
5. Position velocity vector to runway base
6. Once within 100ft, flare
7. At touchdown, retard throttle
8. Set speedbrake to FULL


Note: Unlike with USAF aircraft, flaring is not strictly required, as the F-45A features strong landing gear designed for high-stress carrier landings.
________________


1.6 - TAKEOFF AND LANDING (CATOBAR)


PREFACE:
When Landing Gear is DOWN, Hook DOWN, and Carrier Lights ON (Final Approach), the IFLOLS is visible in your lower-left HUD. Information is relayed via a data-link connection to the carrier. Prioritize use of the HUD IFLOLS over the physical IFLOLS whenever possible, especially in low visibility.
During carrier landings, aim to keep your AOA at 9 degrees. Adjust speed accordingly.


TAKEOFF:
1. Taxi to and hold short of catapult
2. Set launch bar EXTEND
3. Set wings DOWN
4. Connect to catapult
5. Wait until JBD raised. Set launch bar RETRACT
6. Salute catapult shooter
7. Grip right handlebar
8. Advance throttle to AFTERBURNER
9. 3 seconds after launch, perform clearing turn
10. Set landing gear UP


LANDING (CASE I):
 Optical landing system - Wikipedia 

1. At 800ft, set tailhook DOWN
2. Once under 250KT, set landing gear DOWN
3. Turn to intercept glideslope
4. Slow to ONSPEED AoA of 9
5. At ¾ miles, LSO will call out “[CALLSIGN], Call the Ball.”
Response format - “[CALLSIGN], Ball.”
Example: 
LSO - “Kilo 1-1, call the ball.”
Pilot - “Kilo 1-1, Ghost Ball”
NOTE: IF BALL NOT VISIBLE AT ¾ MILE, RESPOND “[CALLSIGN], Clara Ball” AND LSO WILL GIVE YOU INSTRUCTIONS IMMEDIATELY RATHER THAN AT ¾ MILES.
6. Follow the “Meatball” to landing: If the Light is low, so are you. If the Light is high, so are you. Try to keep the Ball in the Center. (BALL WILL INCREASE BRIGHTNESS WHEN CENTERED)
7. In final stages of approach, follow LSO TO THE LETTER.
8. Maintain AoA of 9. Do NOT Flare.
9. Upon Contact, Advance Throttle to Afterburner
10. If Wire Caught) Hold Afterburner for 4 seconds. Set Throttle IDLE. Set Hook UP, Set Wings UP, Taxi to Parking Area
11. (If Wire Missed) Bolter! (SEE WAVE OFF PROCEDURES ON NEXT PAGE.) Monitor Fuel Levels.


LSO GUIDANCE
After calling the ball, the LSO will give guidance down from ¾ miles. If Clara Ball has been called, it will begin immediately.


The commands are as follows:
* Come left - turn slightly left
* Right for lineup - turn slightly right
* Power - climb slightly, add some power to compensate resulting loss of airspeed
* You’re too high - descend slightly, reduce power to compensate
* Wave off! - WAVE OFF IMMEDIATELY, RE-ENTER A HOLDING PATTERN TO THE LEFT. SEE NEXT PAGE FOR PROCEDURES
* Bolter! - You’ve touched the deck but missed the wires - go around! SEE BELOW FOR PROCEDURES


WAVE OFF PROCEDURES
On Wave Off/Bolter Callout:
1. Advance Throttle to Afterburner
2. Pull up to +10 Degrees (WARNING: Maintain Safe AOA.)
3. Keep Airspeed Above 180KIAS
4. Once Airspeed 250KIAS, Power Back and Hold Airspeed
5. Turn Onto Downwind
After Procedure Complete, See Landing (CASE 1) Checklist






CASE I Diagram
  

________________


1.7 - TAKEOFF AND LANDING (V/STOVL)


PREFACE:
V/STOVL equipment onboard the F-45A is intended to be used in conjunction with an LHA-Type ship. F-45A is capable of performing V/STOVL operations from Forward Operating Bases or otherwise unprepared facilities, however due to the fragile and complex nature of the airframe, it is not recommended. For all V/STOVL operations, a TWR above 0.95 is necessary.


Short Takeoff:
1. Set engine TILT to 35 degrees
2. Brakes HOLD
3. MIL POWER
4. Brakes RELEASE
5. At 50kts, ROTATE to 5 degrees
6. At 80kts, set engine TILT to 20 degrees
7. Set landing gear UP
8. Set engine TILT to 0 degrees at 120kts




Vertical Landing:
1. At 5NM, set engine TILT to 90 degrees
2. Reduce speed to 120kts by 3-4NM
3. Turn into final (SINK RATE NO GREATER THAN -4000F/M)
4. At 1NM, flare to 20 degrees until hovering left of landing zone
5. Roll right over landing zone
6. Reduce throttle to touch down














1.8 - VERTICAL CONTROL AUTOPILOT (VCAP)


DESCRIPTION:
The VCAP button on the left is only enabled with a TWR of 1.04 or higher.  VCAP is a mode that allows the pilot to easily match the speed of a moving ship for landing.  The control system changes the inputs of the plane








BASIC OPERATION:
1. Throttle increases forward/back movement.
2. Throttle should be CENTERED after hitting the VCAP button
3. Pushing the stick forward decreases altitude.
4. Pulling the stick backward increases altitude.
5. Moving the stick left or right moves the plane laterally, like a helicopter.
6. Rotating the stick (Rudder) rotates the orientation of the plane.
________________
  



This image shows the throttle placement guidance.  In order to hover the bar should be half filled and aligned with the middle notch (shown by the red arrow).  If the bar is filled higher/forward of the notch, the plane will move forward.  If the bar is lower than the notch, the plane will move backward.
________________


2.1 - BDYNAMICS ADVANCED TOUCHSCREEN MULTI-FUNCTION COLOR DISPLAY WITH GLASS-COCKPIT UI(ATMFCD)


  



OPERATION:
   1. Set MFD to ON
   2. Set brightness AS DESIRED
   3. Use the triangle buttons to adjust screen size
   4. Interact with system prompts with a touch
   5. Press the MENU button to return to the menu at any time
   6. Set a display as SOI to interact with it using your HOTAS
   7. Press and hold the layout save button to save your current layout
THE ATMFCD IS A TOUCHSCREEN


DESCRIPTION:
Created by BDynamics, the ADVANCED TOUCHSCREEN MULTI-FUNCTION COLOR DISPLAY (ATMFCD)is a high-tech solution to pilot displays. Operating as a touchscreen, the ATMFCD’s operation is intuitive, with interaction being done by touch of the screen. The screen can be segmented into several shapes and sizes, allowing certain sensors to be prioritized over others. In addition, “Quick select” buttons are present, allowing the operator to rapidly switch between sensors.


NOTE:
Some operators have reported accidentally touching the buttons on the ATMFCD, which has caused incidents such as negligent discharges. It is advised to caution the position of your hands around the screen to avoid this.
________________


2.2 - GARMIN-54MNAV NAVIGATION DISPLAY
  

BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Select NAV on the ATMFCD
   2. Press the + to zoom in and - to zoom out
   3. Press GPS-S to send the GPS coordinates of a location to your GPST
   4. Detected enemy units will appear on the NAV screen
   5. Carriers and friendlies will show up on the display
   6. Carrier landing guidelines will also appear on the display




DESCRIPTION:
The GARMIN-54MNAV is an avionics suite designed to help with navigation as well as situational awareness. Made in 2022, this display incorporates one of the most advanced systems developed by Garmin. A new and critical feature is Datalink, through which friendly aircraft can point out targets as well as connect directly to an E-2, E-3, and/or E-4 AWACS aircraft. Datalink provides global IFF for all aircraft, setting new standards in military safety.

The GARMIN-54MNAV system also comes equipped with a subsystem: The GARMIN-54GPS-T Global Positioning System - Tracking. This subsystem is a highly accurate GPS/Waypoint targeting system that is used through the GARMIN-54MNAV Navigational display and TSD. These GPS Markpoints can also be sent to other aircraft through Datalink. This system could also be used to employ GPS guided weapons (Ex: GBU-38 GPS Guided JDAM)

1. Select NAV on the ATMFCD
2. Set NAV page as SOI
3. Use the Thumbstick on your Flight-stick to slew cursor over desired area of the NAV page
4. Press GPS-S to create a GPS markpoint

NOTE: There is a desired GPS-T page on the ATMFCD  
________________


2.3 - TACTICAL SITUATION DISPLAY (TSD)
  

BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Select TSD on the ATMFCD
   2. Press + to increase range and - to decrease range
   3. Set the display as SOI
   4. Hover over a target with the cursor
   5. Select a target with a thumbstick press
   6. Aircraft information is displayed in a box in the bottom right
   7. Once a target is selected, the option to slew the EOTS to it or mark the GPS location of it is open
   8. Pressing the HUD button will open a drop-down menu, in which targets on the HMDS can be configured
   9. Pressing the RADAR button will open a drop-down menu, in which the radar can be configured


DESCRIPTION:
The Tactical Situation Display is the most advanced system onboard the F-45A when used in conjunction with the HMDS. The TSD serves two primary functions: systems integration and situational awareness. The TSD serves as a center point for all other sensors, with it being used the best with the AN/APG-91 Radar and the EOTS. For situational awareness, it compiles all datalink contacts into one display and displays them on the HMDS, allowing not only a two-dimensional picture, but a real-time 3D one painted right before the operator’s eyes. Such sheer amounts of information allow experienced operators to maintain supreme battlefield awareness, although inexperienced ones may suffer from information overload. It is advised to configure how much information is displayed to the operator’s needs.
________________


2.4 - RAYTHEON GEN IV(F) HEAD-MOUNTED DISPLAY SYSTEM (HMDS)
  

BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Set the HMD knob to ON
   2. Set HMD brightness AS DESIRED
   3. The Heads-Up Display (HUD) is displayed above the ATMFCD (SEE HUD DIAGRAM BELOW)
   4. All datalink contacts are displayed on the HMDS. 
Symbology is as follows:
   1. Missile - Red circle with line
   2. Friendly Aircraft - Blue circle with line
   3. Friendly Ground Unit - Blue box with round top
   4. Hostile Aircraft - Orange triangle with line
   5. Hostile Ground Unit - Orange Box 
   6. Hostile Ship - Orange box with round top
   5. Units which are emitting a radar signal will have three additional lines (air targets) or an arrow above them (ground targets.)
   6. The helmet has a shade
   7. The helmet includes the GPNVG-18 Night Optical Device (NOD)


HEADS-UP DISPLAY (HUD):
  







________________


2.5 - LOCKHEED MARTIN GEN III EOTS TARGETING SYSTEM
  

BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Select EOTS on the ATMFCD
   2. Set the EOTS as SOI
   3. Slew the camera with the thumbstick
   4. To acquire a target, slew the EOTS on to it. The EOTS will automatically switch to a point track and IFF the target.
   5. Press Zoom + to zoom in and Zoom - to zoom out
   6. Press FWD to slave the EOTS to your nose
   7. Press SENS to switch display modes (DAY-IR, NIGHT-IR, Electro-Optical)
   8. Press GPS-S to send the GPS location of the EOTS to your GPST
   9. Press GPS-A to slew the EOTS to your currently selected GPST
   10. Press HEAD to slave the EOTS to your HMDS. While in HEAD mode, thumbstick up/down controls zoom, and thumbstick click disables HEAD mode.


DESCRIPTION:
The Lockheed Martin Generation III Electro-Optical Targeting System (EOTS) is an advanced precision targeting system integrated within the F-45A. GEN III EOTS provides unparalleled clarity at range, while minimizing drag and RCS impact through internal integration. Onboard F-45, EOTS is used to deliver high-tech weapons systems such as Ballista, in addition to older-generation systems, such as JDAM and Paveway, all with pinpoint accuracy. EOTS’s Laser Target Designator/Rangefinder (LTD/R) provides accurate ranging information, target marking, and weapons guidance at a significant range. The built-in nature and location of the system (under the cockpit) allows a significantly greater gimbal range over an externally mounted system such as LITENING on F/A-26. EOTS can also be used in an Air-to-Air role, proving useful for providing target information beyond visual range.


________________


2.6 - AN/APG-91 RADAR
BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Select “RWR PWR” on the top of the ATMFCD


DESCRIPTION:
The AN/APG-91 is an internally-mounted Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) Radar. APG-91 is slightly more powerful than the APG-75 installed on the F/A-26B. Its scan azimuth is 60 degrees. APG-91 is used as a self-contained way to guide AIM-120D AMRAAM, with effective range sometimes exceeding APG-91’s maximum. In conjunction with LINK 16 datalink systems, AMRAAM-D can be employed entirely without a host aircraft’s radar. APG-91 features an automatic Identification: Friend or Foe (IFF) system, allowing rapid target identification.


________________


2.7 - AN/ALR-96 RADAR WARNING RECEIVER (RWR)


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Select the RWR on the ATMFCD
   2. Press the Mode button then select ON or MUTE to turn on the system
   3. Enemies will first start with a semicircle on top, then, a circle will appear over them when they lock you on (radar spike)
   4. Targets that the RWR believes to be of the greatest threat will be marked with a diamond symbol
   5. Airborne targets will have a triangle on top
   6. Missiles gone “Pitbull” will show as a red M
   7. Pitbull missiles that have acquired a target will show as a red circle with a red M inside
   8. A Continuous Wave (CW) radar beam is indicated with a change of the source radar to red with a flashing circle, accompanied by an aggressive tone. CW beams indicate the launch of a SARH missile.
   9. Terminology:
   1. 4 - MAD-4 Radar
   2. A - AAA Fire Control Radar
   3. DC - Unmanned Cruiser
   4. DF - Drone Fighter
   5. DS - Rotating Fire Control Radar
   6. E4 - E4 AWACS Plane
   7. AE - AEW-50 AWACS plane
   8. F - Fighter
   9. F+ - Air Superiority Fighter
   10. HC - Catamaran Carrier
   11. LR - NMSS Cruiser (Long Range Missiles)
   12. MC - NMSS Cruiser (Medium Range Missiles)
   13. SA - Self-Propelled Anti-Air Weapon (SAAW)
   14. SR - SAM Radar
   10. Listen for audio cues or look at the RWR screen for info on targets
DESCRIPTION:
The AN/ALR-96 Radar Warning Receiver (RWR) is an advanced electronic warfare suite developed by BAE Systems in 2023. It features the latest technology in attention-grabbing audio-visual cues, and easy to read symbols for fast target acquisition, the culmination of 50 years worth of research and designs. With the AN/ALR-96, situational awareness is at your fingertips - or ears! The RWR has a nearly unlimited omnidirectional range. The AN/ALR-96 was developed as a response to the increasing threat of Russian and Chinese fighters launching missiles undetected and without warning until mere seconds to impact. Using a variety of classified high-tech systems, the RWR is the all-seeing eye of the sky.


________________


3.0 - WEAPONS EMPLOYMENT: GENERAL PREFACE


WEAPONS ARMING:
Before any weapons can be employed, they must be armed. This feature is nothing new, being standard in fighters for decades. In the F-45A, there are 2 ways to arm weapons. 
   * The first is the MASTER ARM switch. The MASTER ARM switch is a covered switch that when switched, will arm all equipped weapons. 
   * The second way is through the SMS page. By switching the mark mode to ARM  the pilot is able to mark individual hardpoints to ARMED. This will arm only selected hardpoints.


SMS PAGE:
The F-45A’s Stores Management System (SMS) shows all hardpoints and munitions that may be stored on them. When a specific weapon is selected, there is the option to arm (mentioned above) and change options for weapons (mentioned below). Examples of options with the EQUIP page are: CCIP/CCRP for bombs, guidance package on/off for GPS-Guided bombs, ripple for bombs/rockets, etc. In addition to this, SMS also shows the current status of weapons bay doors. For usage of internally stowed bombs, the bay doors must manually be opened by pressing the trigger with the desired weapon selected.


________________


3.1 - GBU-12 LASER-GUIDED BOMB


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select GBU-12
   3. Select target using EOTS
   4. Align bomb diamond inside firing reticle (best shot inner circle)
   5. (If internally stowed) Hold trigger to open bay door
   6. Press trigger/weapon switch to release
   7. Call out “Pickle”
   8. Ensure that laser is on target until confirmed hit to hold tracking
 
EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
Due to their lower payload and agility midair, laser-guided munitions are best suited for Close Air Support (CAS). They perform extremely well when attacking armored vehicles, and due to the ability to move mid-air, convoys. Laser-guided munitions are not recommended for use against heavy, fixed targets (i.e. Bunkers) due to their small payload.


________________


3.2 - GBU-38/-39 GPS-GUIDED BOMBS


GPS-GUIDED BOMBS IN OPERATION WITH THE F-45A:
   1. GBU-38 500lb bomb
   2. GBU-39 250lb glide bomb






BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select weapon of choice
   3. Designate target using EOTS
   4. Press GPS-S to send GPS coordinates of target
   5. Check target is selected in GPST
   6. Align bomb diamond inside firing reticle (Best shot inner circle)
   7. (If internally stowed) Hold trigger to open bay door
   8. Press trigger/weapon switch to release
   9. Call out “Pickle”


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
GPS-Guided bombs are best suited for precision strike roles, with the GBU-38 acting as a great bunker-buster, and the GBU-39 being able to take out long-distance targets with ease. The one downside of GPS-guided bombs is that due to their use of fixed coordinates, they are completely ineffective when being used against moving targets. GPS-Guided bombs can also disable their guidance package entirely through the SMS page, essentially serving as a dual-purpose weapon and making unguided bombs obsolete.
________________


3.3 - Mk.82/.83 UNGUIDED BOMBS


UNGUIDED BOMBS IN OPERATION WITH THE F-45A:
   1. Mk.82 500lb bomb
   2. Mk.83 1000lb bomb


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select weapon of choice
   3. (If internally stowed) Hold trigger to open bay door
   4. Using Constantly Calculated Release Point Automatic (CCRP AUTO):
   1. Designate target using EOTS
   2. Select “CCRP AUTO” in the SMS page for your bomb of choice
   3. Line up with target using dotted line as guide
   4. Hold trigger (Bomb will be automatically released)
   5. Using Constantly Calculated Impact Point (CCIP)
   1. Visually acquire target
   2. Climb to 5000ft above target
   3. Dive towards target
   4. Press trigger to release when bomb pipper is over target
   6. Call out “Pickle”


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
Unguided bombs perform well against fixed targets like bunkers, due to their heavier payload. They also work well as a suppression weapon; able to be fired repeatedly to decimate a large area of targets. If need be due to budget or other reasons, unguided bombs can be used for the purpose that GPS-Guided bombs fill - a precision strike weapon. However not recommended, it is possible with the use of CCRP AUTO.


________________


3.4 - GBU-53 OPTICALLY GUIDED GLIDE BOMB


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select weapon
   3. Select target with EOTS
   4. Align bomb diamond inside of inner circle
   5. Hold trigger to open bay door
   6. Press weapon switch to launch
   7. Call out “Pickle”


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
Much like the GBU-12, GBU-53 is preferable for its ability to fire at moving vehicles whilst maintaining bunker-busting capabilities. Additionally, GBU-53 has one major advantage: it is fire-and-forget. This means that multiple weapons can be employed against multiple targets at a time before the first one hits, whereas GBU-12 can only target one enemy at a time. GBU-53, much like GBU-39, can glide for long distances, and unlike GBU-39, can hit moving targets. These aspects also make GBU-53 a preferable weapon during anti-shipping operations, as the high damage, ability to hit moving targets, and large payload count tend to be effective against large ships and even Aircraft Carriers.


________________


3.5 - AGM-145 ADVANCED OPTICALLY-GUIDED AIR-TO-GROUND MISSILE


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select weapon
   3. Select target on EOTS
   4. Uncage optical seeker (trigger by default)
   5. Fire weapon (weapon switch button by default)
   6. Call out “Rifle”


LOAL (Lock-On After Launch) OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select weapon
   3. Select target on EOTS
   4. Uncage optical seeker (trigger by default)
   5. Wait for “LOAL” HUD targeting reticle
   6. Aim reticle over/around terrain/obstacle towards the target
   7. Fire weapon (weapon switch button by default)
   8. Call out “Rifle”


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
AGM-145 is an extremely versatile and capable air-to-ground missile, with long range, large payload count, and LOAL (Lock-On After Launch) capabilities. These aspects make it an extremely effective weapon of choice for both SEAD and general air-to-ground operations since it combines both long range and short range capabilities, as well as utilizing the F-45’s advanced TSD system alongside EOTS for exceptional target acquisition, making it capable against anything from a MAD-4 emplacement to a large tank convoy in a city.
________________


3.6 -  AGM-161 JOINT ANTI-SURFACE STANDOFF MISSILE (JASSM)


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Set GPS path through NAV page
   2. Select PATH in GPST page
   3. Align target within targeting circle
   4. Press trigger to release
   5. Call out “Greyhound”


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES
AGM-161 excels in long-range single target destruction. It is not recommended for use in close ranges or against moving vehicles as it is slower and less maneuverable than other Air-To-Ground missiles, with a sub-par optical seeking system. However, AGM-161 is a capable weapon of choice for SEAD, as it has the longest stand-off range, proving effective against MAD-4s and other SAM sites.


NOTE:
“Let’s raise a drink to the poor bastards on SEAD duty, who’s daring keeps the rest of us fighting! Here's to them!” - Anonymous pilot at servicemen’s club. 


"You know, I find the -145 does better in SEAD at exercises. Don't tell my CO though…" - 2Lt. "Jaidensky" at servicemen’s club.


________________


3.7 - AIM-120D ADVANCED MEDIUM RANGE AIR-TO-AIR MISSILE (AMRAAM)


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Switch Master Arm On
   2. Select AIM-120
   3. Select TSD on ATMFCD
   4. Set TSD SOI
   5. Select Target
   6. (Optional for best chance of hit) Align the dot in the Targeting Circle
   1. Remember: Center the dot for the better shot!
   7. Press trigger to launch.
   8. Call out “Fox Three” To avoid confusion with other launch warnings.


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES
AIM-120D excels in long range beyond visual range (BVR) engagements. In conjunction with AEGIS, PATRIOT, or E4 systems relaying accurate positional data, AMRAAM-D can be employed effectively at ranges exceeding 45NM. In situations when external radar sources are not present, AMRAAM is well suited to work in conjunction with APG-91 or even EOTS tracks. AMRAAM’s 39lb warhead is more than capable of critically damaging even the most resistant enemy aircraft. 
________________


3.8 - AIM-9X BLOCK III IR-GUIDED AIR-TO-AIR MISSILE


BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select AIM-9
   3. Uncage seeker (automatically uncages by default)
   4. Align targeting reticle with enemy aircraft
   5. Wait for high-pitched tone
   6. Fire weapons (trigger by default)
   7. Call out “Fox Two” to avoid confusion with other launch warnings. 


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES
IR-Guided missiles are best-suited for engagements of less than 4NM due to them not being able to detect heat signatures from medium-long ranges. Fired IR missiles have a reliable hit-rate, but it is not guaranteed that one hit will damage a vital component. As such, it is recommended to bring multiple IR-Guided missiles on a mission. IR missiles are to be used either as a last resort or a self-defense weapon. If you know there will be enemy aircraft where you’re headed, pack AIM-120’s too.


There are several different modes that you can program the AIM-9X Block III IR-Guided A-A Missile to. 
________________
3.9 - GAU-22 25mm ROTARY CANNON
BASIC OPERATION:
   1. Check Master Arm ON
   2. Select GUN
   3. Lock target, either:
   1. Automatically when in close range
   2. Manually with RADAR POINT or EOTS
   4. Align gun pipper over target
   5. Depress trigger halfway to open gun door
   6. Depress trigger completely to fire (If flying with wingmen, call out “GUNS GUNS GUNS”)


EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES:
Due to its short range, the GAU-22 is only suggested to be used as a substitute to IR-Guided missiles. The Cannon can also be used as an Air-To-Ground weapon, but this is not recommended. Due to the GAU-22’s extremely high fire rate, short bursts are necessary to prolong ammunition lifespan. Used correctly, the Cannon’s ammunition of 800 rounds can disable over 8 aircraft. It is to be noted that there is a slight delay between when the trigger is pulled and when the gun begins firing. This is because the door exposing the gun needs to open. Keep this in mind when conducting snap-shots.


NOTES:
“Recommended or not, I’ve saved more than a few ground-pounders with a well-placed burst. This baby is just as effective on ground targets.” - Anonymous pilot


“Anyone else remember how they said dogfighting would be a thing of the past in the late ’20s? I guess war never changes, huh?” - Anonymous Engineer
________________


4.1 - EMERGENCY PROCEDURES


ENGINE FAILURE:
   1. Start APU
   2. Switch malfunctioning engine(s) OFF
   3. If altitude below 5000ft AGL:
   1. If road or airfield available within range:
   1. Attempt to land (See landing procedures above)
   2. If no road or airfield available:
   1. Check master arm OFF
   2. Confirm no civilian area within 2NM
   3. Set aircraft on crash course that minimizes airframe damage
   4. Eject
   4. If altitude above 5000ft AGL:
   1. Start APU immediately
   2. Pitch to approximately -2.5 degrees
   3. Confirm APU RPM NOMINAL
   4. Switch malfunctioning engine off.  Attempt to restart the engine
   5. Confirm engine RPM NOMINAL (If engine RPM NOT NOMINAL, Consult BELOW 5000ft AGL Checklist.)
   6. Climb to 10000ft
   7. Contact nearest airbase for emergency landing
   8. Land (See landing procedures above)


MISSILE IMPACT:
   1. Turn cold from bandit(s)
   2. Confirm engine RPM nominal
   3. (If engine has failed) See ENGINE FAILURE section above
   4. Check pitch responsive
   5. Check roll responsive
   6. Check yaw responsive
   7. (If Flt. Controls unresponsive) Attempt to land at nearest airbase or road (See below for instructions on alternate control methods)
   8. Observe and note any visible damage on wings, fuselage, elevators, and rudders
   9. (If low chance of complete airframe loss) Continue flight
   10. (If med. to high chance of complete airframe loss) Contact nearest tower for emergency landing


FLIGHT CONTROL FAILURE (ALTERNATE CONTROL METHODS):
   1. Yaw:
   1. (If split throttle available) Cut power for the engine corresponding with the turn direction. Compensate roll.
   2. (If split throttles unavailable) Shut down the engine corresponding with turn direction. Compensate roll
   2. Roll:
   1. Same as yaw, but compensate with yaw instead of pitch
   3. Pitch:
   1. Use power to control pitch, utilizing airbrake and flaps for additional authority. Maintain high airspeed. Do not attempt a landing. This is unsafe without pitch control. Instead, guide the aircraft to a safe ditching location. Once the airframe is on a safe trajectory away from the civilian population, eject.






________________


4.2 - MISSILE EVASION: RADAR-GUIDED
OVERVIEW
In a modern combat theatre, radar-guided missiles pose the most serious threat to F-45 pilots. Even with the stealth characteristics of the F-45 (see 4.4), there is no single tactic that can be followed to successfully evade radar-guided missiles. This does not imply that evasion is impossible. A Ghost driver that properly assesses a given situation and combines the right strategies can greatly increase their chance of defeating radar-guided threats. 
This section will be broken up into two parts: First, we will discuss the principles of radar-guided missiles and their relationship to other weapons systems and aircraft. Second, we will explore strategies that can be deployed to defeat radar-guided missiles in various scenarios.
PRINCIPLES:
QUALITIES OF A RADAR-GUIDED MISSILE
A radar-guided missile tracks its target by identifying the reflection of radio and microwave waves reflecting from the target’s surfaces. The source of these radar waves can be an aircraft, ground radar system, or the missile’s internal radar projector. This method allows radar-guided missiles to track targets at much longer ranges than IR systems and thus achieve greater speeds. It is the speed and integrity of radar tracking technology that make radar-guided missiles so deadly.
AIR LAUNCHED
Most modern Air-to-Air radar-guided missiles are “Active”, meaning their internal radar projectors are powerful enough to illuminate their target at medium range, however, this ability degrades at longer distances. Radar guided air-launched missiles will typically rely on aircraft-based radar to track and relay target information until the last few miles. This method has the added benefit of not alerting the targeted aircraft of the position of the missile via RWR. Even if line of sight with the launcher radar projector is broken, an active radar homing (ARH) guided missile is still a threat but can be more easily defeated.
The improvement of stealth and jamming technology in the first quarter of the 21st century has reduced the range at which a weapons-grade track can be acquired. This has reduced the viable shoot range to around 15-25NM as opposed to the 50-60NM of their original design. Although this does allow better defensive posture and a higher evasion rate, it has the unintended consequence of increasing the number of missiles that reach their target before exhausting fuel. A defending pilot will still need to focus on wasting the missile’s energy early on but may find themselves facing a powered missile after only a short period of mid-course defensive tactics.
 
SAM RADAR-GUIDED MISSILES


Radar guided missiles launched from a surface installation require lock-on by ground control radar for a significant portion of the missile’s flight. This means that destroying or breaking line-of-sight with the fire control radar can disable a SAM’s ability to track an aircraft even after the missile has traveled a significant distance. More advanced SAMs have improved ARH capabilities and may remain threatening even after destruction or line-of-sight loss with control radar at range.   
RADAR VS. IR-GUIDED MISSILES
Radar Guided missile systems rely on range, speed, and tracking to kill their target.  As such, the missile itself tends to be heavier, faster, and less maneuverable. Let’s break down these missile types and their qualities.


 
	IR Guided
	Radar Guided
	Speed
	Low
	High
	Acceleration
	High
	Medium
	Maneuverability
	High
	Low
	Range
	Short
	Medium/High
	CM resilience
	Poor
	Good/Very Good
	 
 
ENERGY
Properly deciding the correct course of action when threatened by a radar missile requires an understanding of the energy relationship between it and your aircraft. Many of the strategies in the next section take advantage of the differences in energy usage that exist between an aircraft and the missile threatening it.
Although a Radar guided missile can achieve much greater speeds than an aircraft, it is less able to maneuver in short order. As distance closes, the degrees of its required lead increases. If fired at long range (+20NM) missiles may run out of fuel before impacting targets. This energy is used to accelerate the missile, fight air resistance, and change its velocity vector (maneuvering). Once fuel is depleted, a missile will begin to lose velocity until it reaches its target or begins to fall. Thicker air and frequent maneuvering speed up this process and can quickly reduce the distance a missile can fly at a threatening speed.
Aircraft, on the other hand, have a relatively unlimited amount of potential energy stored as fuel. Although unable to accelerate like or reach the speeds of a missile, an aircraft can continuously expend energy through maneuvering and pushing through air. In addition, the wide surface of the F-45A allows for the rapid exchange of forward velocity to angular velocity (trading speed for turning).
All this can be broken down into the following statement: Aircraft have high Delta-V (potential change in velocity) but low impulse (thrust), whereas missiles have low Delta-V but high impulse. Many strategies for defeating radar-guided missiles rely heavily on the exploitation of this relationship.
 
CHAFF
Chaff is a countermeasure deployed by a defending pilot in order to disrupt a missile. The F-45A uses a JAFFing technique where radar signals are beamed against the dropped chaff in such a way that even doppler-effect missiles can be fooled if at a lesser extent.
Chaff is far less effective against radar missiles than flares are against IR missiles, but this should not discount its usage. Chaff is used to inhibit a radar’s ability to accurately track a target.
Chaff is only effective when your velocity is perpendicular to the radar source. If anything, remember these 4 points on chaff:
1.  Missiles will attempt to search for the target again after chaff has faded away.
2. Deploying chaff is ineffective unless the radar has a lock (TWS or STT.)
3.  Chaff is more situational than flares.
4.  Even if deploying chaff doesn’t break lock, it can greatly reduce the missile’s accuracy in the terminal phase.
 
MANEUVERS:
OVERVIEW
Unlike other topics in this manual, Radar missile evasion does not have a single sequence of steps which ensure success. Instead, radar missile evasion relies on various maneuvers that can be made simultaneously and/or sequentially to maximize chances of survival in any given scenario.
This section will go over these maneuvers, how they work, and when to employ them. This will be followed by example scenarios that showcase how these maneuvers can be used together to achieve evasion.
We will refer to the aircraft defending against the radar missile as the “DA” (defending aircraft) for brevity.


 
 
________________


4.2.1 - TERRAIN MASKING
  

WHAT: Terrain Masking is the most reliable maneuver that can be used to break a radar missile lock. In this maneuver, the DA simply uses ground obstacles to break line-of-sight with the radar source.  This radar source can be the ground control radar, hostile aircraft radar, or the missile itself.
 WHEN: This maneuver should only be considered when flying low over variable terrain or urban areas.  This maneuver is ineffective: at sea, when the radar source is a high-flying aircraft, or when the DA needs to engage hostile air targets with AMRAAMs. This maneuver can be used at any time before or after a missile is launched, however it is most effective early on.
HOW:
1.  Identify radar source using RWR or ARAD (HMCS most effective).
2.  Maneuver in such a way that terrain or obstacles break radar source’s line-of-sight with DA. If flying over mountainous terrain, roll inverted and pull rather than pushing down.
3.  Ensure warning tone has gone silent before emerging.
4.  IF warning tone continues, identify incoming missile and mask that.
 
4.2.2 - BEAMING
WHAT:  Beaming is a maneuver that decreases the kinetic energy of a long-range radar guided missile by forcing it to turn and lead its target. Beaming can be done by leading a missile to the side in one single direction, or by switching flight direction after a few seconds. It is important to note that beaming will not break a missile’s lock or prevent it from reaching the DA. It will simply drain the missile’s energy, often making it easier to evade in later maneuvers. Additionally, the optimal start time for a beam is immediately at launch. It is suggested that a beam maneuver be started upon suspected hostile launch or after DA deployment of ordinance. Zig-Zag beaming is only admissible if a missile launch has occurred from far enough away.
WHEN: Beaming is a good, simple tactic that should be employed early on when terrain masking is not an option.
  Beaming can be used in conjunction with most other maneuvers in this guide and should always be used to some extent when the DA is still engaging forward. Likewise, the Beaming maneuver is highly effective when used with other tactics such as dragging and going cold.
HOW:
1.  Identify the bearing of the missile visually by its smoke trail, or RWR/ARAD information
2.  Turn at an angle roughly perpendicular to the missile, try not to close distance with the missile too rapidly.
3.  Use full afterburner and continue in this direction for a few seconds. The farther the missile is from you, the longer you should stay in this direction.
4.  (OPTIONAL, if missile is at range) Make a fast high-G turn in the opposite direction and repeat at increasing frequency essentially zig-zagging.
5.  Choose a Terminal strategy once the missile goes pitbull
 
 
4.2.3 - DRIVING
WHAT: Driving is forcing a missile to hit the ground as it tries to lead its target. This is not confirmed to be effective against all missiles in all states, however it is highly effective against SAMS and other missiles prior to the Pitbull phase.
WHEN: Driving should only be used right after the launch of a radar guided missile, and preferably if that missile is a SAM.  It is also most effective if the DA is at a high velocity, with an elevation relative to the launch site high enough to ensure the missile hits terrain before the DA does, but low enough to allow the DA to dive to ground level before missile impact. It is a good idea to drive in a way that leads directly into a notch, cold, or terrain mask in case of failure. If multiple SAMs are launched in proximity to each other (i.e. from a cruiser fleet), driving should be employed FIRST as it can neutralize all missiles in short order without the need for terrain variation.
1.  Identify missile is in visual range and launched
2.  Dive straight down while in afterburner.
3.  Level out just above water/terrain, stay as close to terrain as possible.
4.  If missile fails to impact, begin follow-up maneuver and prepare for terminal evasion.
 
4.2.4 - DOPPLER NOTCHING
WHAT: Doppler Notching is a precise maneuver that, if done successfully and paired with chaff, can completely break radar lock. Doppler notching takes advantage of a radar’s tracking system in a way that makes the DA “blend” into the terrain.  Radar guided missiles distinguish their targets from the terrain below them by looking at the doppler shift of the reflection. If a DA is flying perfectly perpendicular to the radar sensor with terrain behind him, the radar will have trouble distinguishing it from the passing terrain.
WHEN: Notching can ONLY be used when there is terrain behind the target, relative to the missile. This means it is a good strategy to be used with some slight dragging. It is also good to use with beaming, as notching often obligates beaming. The effectiveness of this maneuver varies on a few factors, primarily radar signal strength (mostly radar power, distance, and locking strength.) Notching is usually only effective against one radar at a time.  It is good practice to not solely rely on notching when trying to evade.
HOW:
1.  Identify radar source
2.  Put yourself in between the radar source and terrain (flying below the radar source is a surefire way of doing this.)
3.  Turn so that the radar source is to your 3 or 9 o’clock.
4.  Fly so that the source stays at 3-9 o’clock. (using full afterburner will beam better, however making it harder to notch)
5. Begin deploying chaff
6. Perform slight horizontal s-turns in order to briefly enter a notch multiple times while continuing to deploy chaff, then
A: If radar (surface/air) lock is lost
        1. Ensure no ARH missile is a threat of acquiring.
        2. Re-engage.
B: If radar (missile) lock is lost
        1. Maintain a notching position while maneuvering out of the missile's path of travel, remaining cautious of a re-acquire.






C: If radar lock is not lost after a few seconds, abandon the notch attempt and employ other defensive tactics.
 
4.2.5 - GOING COLD
WHAT: Going cold, the cold-defense, or “running away” all refer to the somewhat useful strategy intended to extend the distance a radar guided missile must travel to reach you. When going cold, the DA attempts to put as much distance between him/herself and the missile as quickly as possible. Unlike IR missiles, radar guided weapons are more concerned with personality and thus do not care how hot an aircraft’s ass is, therefore it is strongly advised to use full afterburner during this maneuver. Cold is also a good Terminal Strategy for missiles that are low on energy (going slow).
WHEN: The cold defense should only be used when a missile has just been launched from long range and the source is not closing. Using the cold defense against air superiority fighters or interceptors is not advised, as it can make re-engagement extremely dangerous.  Additionally, the cold defense disengages the DA from the fight, meaning at some point they will have to re-engage. Re-engagement after a cold maneuver should usually only be done when the threat is minimal.
HOW:
1.  Identify missile
2.  Turn around
a.  (Optional) & Drag
3.  Go fast
a.  (Optional) & Weave slightly/ “gently beam”
b.  (Optional) & Terrain Mask
If missile goes Pitbull
1.  Observe energy state of missile
2. Decide whether to continue cold or to perform other terminal evasive actions
3.  Execute  


 
4.2.6 - DRAGGING
WHAT: Dragging is a defensive strategy that exploits the energy relationship between missiles and aircraft. Light, fast, low delta-v missiles struggle to maintain energy in the thick atmosphere at low elevation. By forcing a missile to spend more time at lower elevations, a DA can reduce its energy and defeat it more easily.  Dragging is not always the best strategy, especially if the DA intends to push bandits or avoid a chase/dogfight.
 
WHEN: Dragging is most effective at long ranges and the missile is launched from a high altitude, and the DA plans to go cold. Dragging should not be used as a lone defense and should be used alongside beaming or cold defense maneuvers. Attempting to drag while heading toward the missile will often not produce effective results. Additionally, dragging is best used after the DA has launched AMRAAMs and has tracked them to the target near or past their automatic pitbull point.
HOW:
1.  Confirm missile is high
2.  Perform split-s and level out as low as possible
3.  Go cold or beam/notch with full afterburner
4.  Stay low while performing the maneuver chosen in step 3.
 
 
 
4.2.7 - HIGH-G MANEUVERING
WHAT:  At the terminal phase of a radar missile, the DA needs to begin to exploit the radar missile’s low maneuverability and potentially low energy. High-G maneuvers of some level are almost always required if a radar missile lock is not broken through terrain masking, driving, notching, or chaff deployment, and the missile has enough energy to reach its target. In this strategy, the pilot will quickly burn and jink, almost like beaming, but in all 3 dimensions and switching more frequently. The best High-G position for a DA is above the missile and flying at its 2 or 10 o’clock. A DA should be careful of prolonged vertical maneuvers as this greatly increases a missile's impulse advantage. Having good situational awareness helps increase the odds of a missile defeat.
WHEN: Once a missile goes pitbull, the DA’s pilot is advised to squeeze their cheeks. This is not in anticipation for a missile hit but rather to keep from passing out in the 9-G turns he/she is about to make. High-G maneuvers are most effective when the DA is relatively nose-hot to the missile.
High-G maneuvers should only be used if the missile is within a few seconds of the DA. This maneuver will greatly reduce the aircraft’s forward velocity which is important for both beaming and cold defenses.
HOW:
1.  Identify incoming missile
2.  Confirm Missile is close
3.  Make rapid rolls to align with turn vectors to ensure positive G.
4.  Swerve at 6-9 G’s with each turn lasting between 2 and 5 seconds
5. Once visual on the missile’s engine/body can be made, perform the following maneuvers.
a.  If the missile is below, climb slightly and place missile at 2-3 or 9-10 o’clock, invert to level off just as missile passes above or below
b.  If the missile is above, dive sharply into a beam or head-on. Barrel-roll if possible
c.  If neither option is immediately applicable, beam hard and do a corck-screw barrel-roll or Immelmann
6.  Utilize Barrel rolls and Split-S maneuvers.
7.  Do not repeatedly make turns that reduce airspeed.
8.  Avoid missile as it passes
 
If you hear an explosion after missile merge
1.  Confirm no other missile threats are present
2.  Check Engine RPM
3.  Visually assess control surfaces for damage. See Pg. 36.  


   
4.3 - MISSILE EVASION: IR-GUIDED


OPERATION OF IR-GUIDED MISSILES:
IR-Guided air-to-air and surface-to-air missiles, commonly referred to as “heat seekers,” acquire their targets by locking on to the infrared radiation (heat) of the target aircraft, usually the engine(s). Due to this, they have a relatively short range. Most IR-guided missiles are all-aspect, meaning that they can acquire a lock from all aspects of a plane, not just the rear, where the engine(s) are located. If there are multiple targets in a close area, the missile will lock on the strongest (warmest). This means that they can be easily evaded by idling the engine(s) and dumping flares. The missile will lock on to the stronger heat signature of the flares and strike them instead of the aircraft.


EVASION:
   1. Set throttle to IDLE
   2. Turn to the 9 o’clock or 3 o’clock of the missile (if possible)
   3. Dive or climb depending on current airspeed
   4. Dump flares


NOTES:
“Be careful if using CM’s while in formation. Nothing quite screws with your sightlines like a wingman covering your canape with chaff.” - Anonymous pilot 














________________


4.4 - RADAR LOW-OBSERVABILITY (STEALTH)


4.4.1 - FUNDAMENTALS OF STEALTH
RADAR (Radio Detection And Ranging) is a system that allows long-range detection, ranging, tracking, and targeting of aircraft. As the name may suggest, radars emit radio waves and listen for a wave to bounce back at the emitter. If not enough radio waves are reflected back at the emitter, the target is not detected. As such, stealth aircraft are designed specifically not to reflect radio waves. They do this in two ways: either reflecting the wave in a different direction, so that it does not return to the emitter, or by absorbing the waves. Since the whole aircraft is coated with Radar Absorbing Materials (RAM), the amount of radio waves absorbed stays mostly constant throughout the aircraft. However, the amount of radio waves that are reflected in different directions varies based on the angle of the aircraft as well as the power of the radar emitter and one of the largest factors is the distance of detection.


4.4.2 - RADAR CROSS SECTION (RCS)
  Radar cross section is simply the perceived size of an object by a radar. That is, an object with a lower radar cross section will appear smaller to a radar and thus be harder to detect, whilst the opposite is true for an object with a higher radar cross section.


Low-Observable (stealthy) aircraft, like the F-45 and the F/A-26 to an extent have a very unique RCS profile. As seen in the above chart, small values are closer to the middle of the picture.  This means that the F-45 (and to an extent the F/A-26) are most stealthy from the front head on and from the rear.  The F-45 has the largest radar return directly from below and directly from above.
This information is in no way insignificant. Any F-45 pilot wishing to maintain stealth should know that the aircraft is stealthiest head on and/or in a notch. While zooming straight for a radar site might seem like a poor tactical decision, it can make the difference between being detected and not, especially at short range.


This information should also be kept in mind when remaining undetected has been deemed impossible and it is required to enter a defensive state, most usually a radar notch (see 4.2.4) or similar. When conducting these maneuvers, it is common to enter a Split-S in order to reduce altitude or otherwise expose one’s belly. It is imperative that the belly of the aircraft is exposed as little as possible when conducting said maneuvers, especially when employing chaff or relying on electronic warfare support (SEE CNAF-9041.11).


  Radar detection range can be evaluated with the following formula:
(radar strength * return amount / distance^2 ) > 1 / receiver sensitivity)




________________


4.4.3 - EMPLOYMENT STRATEGIES
Any pilot that desires to use their aircraft’s stealth to its best ability must be willing to employ less than conventional tactics. Coordination and communication throughout the strategies listed will vary greatly by individual unit or even flight, but they nonetheless serve as an accurate primer.


4.4.3.1 - TERRAIN MASKING + POPUP:
As explained in 4.2.1, terrain masking is an extremely effective strategy when wishing to remain undetected, even for unstealthy aircraft. The problem with engaging targets while or shortly after terrain masking arises from the fact that the stand-off range of all weapons systems degrades at low altitudes. Maintaining a low altitude into an attack run exposes the pilot to fire from AAA and SHORAD (see CNAF-5701.6: 2030’s Threat Assessment).


The most effective use of a Terrain Masking Popup attack is as follows. The pilot should position themself so that there is terrain between them and the target, either on-the-fly using the NAV system, or in a pre-briefed manner. The pilot should then employ terrain masking and maintain radar OFF until reaching the aforementioned terrain. After which, the pilot should advance throttle to afterburner and climb between 20-45 degrees. The pilot should acquire the targets  as soon as possible, and if using bombs employ them while still in a climb to “toss” them towards the target, increasing range.


When operating in a flight, it is imperative that the leader briefs the wingmen, either efficiently before the mission, or clearly on-the-fly. In both cases, the leader should make sure that all wingmen are clear on what targets they will be engaging, the ingress profile, and the egress profile.






4.4.3.2 - TERRAIN MASKING + EOTS + AMRAAM:
Terrain masking + EOTS + AMRAAM is a common and effective way to deal with enemy air threats in a stealthy manner, using the EOTS to track and fire at targets with AMRAAMs. This strategy is preferable when little to no friendly radar coverage is available. If there is ample radar coverage provided by friendly aircraft, see 4.4.3.3. If operating alone, pilots should use the EOTS in NIGHT mode when searching for airborne targets and smoketrails. When searching for targets that are cluttered by the ground, use of the DAY mode may be necessary. This strategy uses the stealth characteristics of the F-45 to their greatest extent–as such explicit caution must be taken in minimizing all signatures and emissions. Pilots should only activate their radars in the most dire situations where they have already been detected. When searching for targets, the afterburners must not be engaged and special caution must be taken to ensure that no mach cones are being produced.


How to proceed in an engagement is up to the pilot’s personal preference. In exercises, it was found that both aggressive and passive pilots performed well. It’s not up to how you fly the plane, you just gotta do it well.


The tactic can be especially effective in elements of two. With good communication and situational awareness, two skilled Ghost drivers can engage a much larger force of 4th generation aircraft, without leaving a trace. This strategy can also be used in a reconnaissance sort of sense; feeding information about enemy aircraft to other F-45s or even F/A-26’s to get the kill. 


4.4.3.4 - GO HIGH + DATALINK + AMRAAM:










________________
5.1 - INDEX: CALLOUTS
   * (Package/target) As Fragged: Package/target is as stated in mission briefing
   * (Target) Cold: Target is heading away
   * (Target) Flanking: Target has a stable aspect of 30-60 degrees (Heading perpendicular)
   * (Target) High: Target is between 10000ft and 40000ft ASL
   * (Target) Hot: Target is heading towards
   * (Target) Low: Target is below 10000ft ASL
   * (Target) Very High: Target is above 40000ft ASL
   * Bingo Fuel: Minimum fuelstate needed to return to base has been reached
   * Bruiser: Launch of Anti-Ship Missile (ASM)
   * Engaged Defensive: Defending against an enemy missile
   * Engaged: In a fight with an enemy
   * Faded: Target radar lock has been lost
   * Fox 1 (Unused): Launch of semi-active radar-guided air-to-air missile (AAM)
   * Fox 2: Launch of IR-Guided AAM
   * Fox 3: Launch of active radar-guided AAM 
   * Greyhound: Launch of cruise missile
   * Guns, Guns, Guns: Cannon is being used
   * Magnum: Launch of anti-radiation missile
   * Merged: In a dogfight with an enemy
   * Mudspike: Enemy ground target has radar lock
   * Nails: Detection of enemy search radars on RWR
   * No Joy: No visual/radar lock. Opposite of tally.
   * Pickle: Release of bomb 
   * Pitbull: Active radar-guided AAM has switched to internal tracking
   * Rifle: Launch of air-to-ground missile (AGM)
   * Shack: Enemy ground target destruction
   * Spike: Enemy Aircraft Has Radar lock
   * Splash: Enemy air target destruction
   * Tally: Detection of enemy on radar
   * Winchester: Weapons load depleted or otherwise empty
5.2 - INDEX: ABBREVIATIONS, ACRONYMS, AND TERMINOLOGY
   * AAA: Anti-aircraft-artillery
   * AAM: Air-to-air missile
   * AGM: Air-to-ground missile
   * AMRAAM: Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missile
   * Angels: Altitude in thousands of feet
   * ASM: Anti-Ship Missile
   * ATC: Air Traffic Control
   * AWACS (also referred to as AEW&C): Airborne Warning and Control System (Airborne Early Warning & Control)
   * Ball/Meatball: IFLOLS (Improved Fresnel Lens Optical Landing System)
   * Bandit: Enemy air target
   * Bird: Friendly SAM
   * Blue on Blue: Friendly Fire
   * Bogey: Unidentified air target
   * BRA(A): Bearing, range, altitude (aspect)
   * BVR: Beyond Visual Range
   * C2: Command and Control
   * CAP: Combat Air Patrol
   * CAS: Close air support
   * Cat: Aircraft carrier catapult
   * Chick: Friendly Aircraft
   * ECM: Electronic Countermeasures
   * Flight Level (rarely used): Altitude in hundreds of feet
   * G-LOC: Loss of consciousness due to G-forces. Applies to both blackout and redout.
   * HUD: Heads-up display
   * IFF: Identification - Friend or foe
   * Mother/Mom: Home aircraft carrier
   * Nav: Navigation
   * Overlord: Nearest or otherwise on station AWACS aircraft
   * Package: Group of targets
   * RTB: Return To Base
   * RWR: Radar warning receiver
   * SAM: Surface-to-air missile
   * SCUD: Theater (non-intercontinental) ballistic missile
   * SEAD: Suppression of Enemy Air Defenses
   * Shooter:
   * Aircraft launching/releasing munitions
   * Crew member controlling aircraft carrier catapult
   * TACAN: TACtical Air Navigation. Used to automatically set WPT to RTB.
   * TWR: Thrust to Weight Ratio
   * U(C)AV: Unmanned (Combat) Aerial Vehicle
   * Yardstick: The use of TACAN for rangefinding




END OF TECHNICAL MANUAL
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CREDITS & DISCLAIMER BELOW
Credits and Disclaimer


This manual was made possible by:
   * Freedomplaza - Lead writer/Owner
   * Chieh (Shamebird) - Missile Evasion Section
   * Dr White - Notes
   * Jaidensky - Editor and Writer
   * VAF Black - Editor and Writer
   * Airstriker10 - Editor and Writer




________________


DISCLAIMER
The F-45A NATOPS Manual is in no way officially endorsed by the United States Navy, or its NATOPS program, and is a work of fiction. The specified systems in this manual are based on non-copyrighted real systems, however the companies are not, therefore this manual is under Creative Commons. This manual is completely independent and in no way sponsored by Garmin, BAE Industries, Rockwell Dynamics, or any other specified company. The F-45A is part of the flight simulator VTOL VR, developed by Paolo Encarnacion of Boundless Dynamics PLC.
The F-45A and VTOL VR are the intellectual property of BahamutoD, Paolo Encarcion, and as such this manual is a completely open-source project under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-SA 4.0). You are free to build upon the document and submit changes to Freedomplaza#4507 on Discord for approval. You MUST credit Freedomplaza when distributing sections under CC BY-SA 4.0. This manual is furthermore solely to be used in VTOL VR for your own recreational purposes. Use of procedures outlined in this manual, such as CASE 1 landing procedures and landing technique for real-life flying is completely prohibited and unsafe.


This Disclaimer was last updated on 4/1/2022.
No it is not an April Fool’s joke.




Finished: xx/x/2022
Page